			Last revised 10-Jan-17

			  Questionnaire for

		 Harvard Extension School CSCI E-92:
		   Principles of Operating Systems

			     Spring 2017


Name:				  Home/Cellular phone number:
Jyot Buch			  980-267-8794

E-mail:				  Work phone number:
jyb487@g.harvard.edu              508-647-1298

Where are you located?  What is your time zone?
50, Dinsmore Avenue, Framingham, MA, 01702, USA
Time Zone : Eastern Standard Time (EST)

So that we can meet on-line, if necessary, what is your Skype name
and/or your Google Hangouts name?
skype: jyot.buch
Google Hangouts: buchjyot@gmail.com

Occupation (If an undergraduate student, please specify your major and
year and at which school; If a graduate student, please specify your
department, field, and year and at which school).
I completed my Masters of Science in Electrical Engineering in May 2016,
from the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, with focus in Control
Systems and Optimization.

Are you currently enrolled in a degree program?
No

Have you taken:
  CSCI E-10a (Formerly CSCI E-50a) (Introduction to Computer Science
      Using Java I),
  CSCI E-10b (Formerly CSCI E-50b) (Introduction to Computer Science
      Using Java II),
  CSCI E-50 (Formerly CSCI E-52) (Intensive Introduction to Computer
      Science),
  CSCI E-28 (Formerly CSCI E-215) (Unix/Linux Systems Programming),
  CSCI E-124 (Data Structures and Algorithms),
  or equivalents
(specify which)?
No, I have not taken any of them. 

Have you taken CSCI E-22 (Formerly CSCI E-119) (Data Structures)?

	If not, how do you meet the prerequisite?
No, I have not taken the Data Structures course, but I have a good programming 
experiance. Moreover, along with the course, I plan to learn some of the key 
requirements of understanding and implementing data structures such as linked list,
hash tables etc.. 

Do you have experience using Unix?  Do you have experience programming
using Unix system calls?  If yes, please describe.  If not, how do you
meet the prerequisite?
Yes, I have experiance using UNIX, I have a basic experiance with system calls,
which includes low level file I/O operations. 

Are you already registered for this class?  -- If not, do you intend
to register?  Also, are you registered as a distance student?  Do you
intend to attend classes in person?
Yes, I am registered for the class and I intend to attend classes in person. 

If you are a distance student, have you already ordered and/or
received the Freescale K70 development modules (TWR-K70F120M-KIT
(which includes TWR-K70F120M, TWR-SER, TWR-ELEV) and the TWR-LCD-RGB)?
Note: If the TWR-K70F120M-KIT is not available, the individual
components should be ordered.
Not Applicable

Are you taking the course for undergraduate credit, graduate credit,
or noncredit?
Graduate Credit

What additional appropriate course or work experience do you have?
Work experiance with basic OS command line commands for WINDOWS, LINUX and MAC. 

What is your math background?
My background is in Control Systems and Optimization. I have taken MATH courses in my 
undergrad and grad which involved multivariable calculas, linear algebra, optimization,
probablity, Statastics, Random Processes, etc. 

What computer languages do you know (please include assembler and
high-level languages)?  Have you programmed in the C Programming
Language, C++, or Java?
I know C, C++, MATLAB, Python. 
I have worked with 8051 and PIC micro-controlers 

What operating systems have you used (e.g. Windows, Mac OS, Linux,
iOS, Android, etc.)?
Windows, Mac OS, Linux, iOS, Android

What computers have you used (i.e., which machine language instruction
sets)?
I have not worked directly with computer instructions sets, but I have programmed embedded 
micr-controllers such as 8051.

Why are you taking the course?
I am taking this course to enhance my knowledge and skills. Moreover, I work on the product called Simulink
Desktop Real-Time, which interacts with the OS in real time. This course will help me 
understand MATLAB and Simulink better in the way they interacts with the OS. Hence, enables me to be more
proficient in my work. 

If the class needs to be rescheduled, is Thursday evening acceptable?
Yes

Other comments:
